In the last video,
I showed an example of an animal class
with a static method and the dog class extending it
and overriding it while hiding the parent's version.
So let's now take a closer look at
inherited static variables.
So we need to create another class
here in the Inheritance project.
I'm gonna call this one company dot OnBoardBranch.
Okay, so there's the code for that.
Now this code actually contains a total of four classes.
Firstly, we've got an employee class there
that represents an employee of a company,
and it's just got two attributes,
namely name and type there.
And you can see I've also got a constructor.
Moving down, we've got a company class
that represents a company which has two static fields,
branch count and employee count,
and two public methods, add employee and add branch.
Moving on down, our third class is branch,
and that extends company and adds to it a branch name.
You can see there's been a constructor set up as well,
and then the fourth class, onBoardBranch.
Well, that contains the main method,
which you can see there is creating
a new instance of branch,
creates two employee instances,
creating also a company instance,
then it's executing the add branch company's
method of the branch instance,
and add employee on the two employee instances,
and then finally it's printing out the static counters.
So let's run this.
Right, so, as you can see,
we've got number of branches, one,
number of employees equals two.
I think you'd agree that's probably pretty straightforward,
so we've got one quote unquote bucket to maintain,
an employee count and a branch count,
because they've been defined as static.
But what happens if we
access these static variables from the subclass?
So I'm gonna add some code down here,
right down at the bottom of the main method,
after the printouts.
You see that I'm trying to do that now
by accessing the static variables from the subclass.
Let's run the code.
So what does this actually mean?
Well it's the static variable like
an instance variable given a placeholder
for data in the branch class,
why are the values the same if this is the case?
Well, a good way to shed some light on this question
would be to add a static initializer to the company class,
so let's go ahead and do that.
Go up to our company class.
Gonna add it right down here,
just before the end of the class definition.
And you can see that I've set branch count to ten there,
and also put it out, some text
so we know that it's been executed.
So that's for the company class,
but let's also do the same thing,
a static initializer, to the branch class.
I'm gonna go and do that as well,
and I'll add this, down at the bottom,
below the constructor.
Similar thing there, we're printing out some text,
but we're also setting the employee count to 200 there.
So let's run this code.
So looking at the output, this seems to confirm that
company is the class where these variables reside.
You can see that based on
the output we've now got
and the values that both the branches
and employees is now set to.
Right, next what we're gonna do is
we're gonna add static variables
with the same name to branch,
to the branch class, and see what happens.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Go back up to the branch, to the top of the branch class.
We're gonna paste in.
So, you can see we've got a static int branch count,
static int employee count, no branch class now.
We execute the code.
And you can see now that we've got different results,
number of branches is 11,
number of employees two, but call from branch,
branches equals zero, and number of employees is 200.
We've still got our company
and branch static initializers being executed there.
So this demonstrates that we're now
keeping different counts in the static variables
and the branch must now be keeping its own counts.
But adding an employee to branch
doesn't actually increment the employee count on branch.
Now we could actually modify this behaviour
by adding a method to branch
which overrides the method in company.
So let's do that.
We're gonna go back to branch again.
You've still got it on screen.
I'm gonna put that below the static initializer.
So there's our method, add employee,
we're overriding the method now
and we're setting the employee count, as you can see.
So if we run the code...
So you can see now that
we're now incrementing the employee count
on the branch class with this change.
Now we've actually overridden that method.
So again, the employee count on the branch class
has been updated as a result of the overridden method
add employee that we've just added to the branch class.
Although all the functionality for
accessing static fields is inherited by a class,
the instance of a class doesn't
actually get its own copy,
in this case its own counters,
of the static field variables.
So let's explore now what happens when
we override a parent's static attribute
with a non-static attribute of the same name on the child.
So what we wanna do is go back to our branch class.
At the moment you can see
I'm on 44 and 45, we've got static definitions.
Let's remove the static from both of those.
We're also going to change
the static initalizer, so that it's no longer static.
And obviously you can see we've got an error there.
And the other thing we'll need to do,
now that we're not using statics,
is we'll need to make a change down here.
We've got branch dot branch count.
We'll need to change that
to use the instance that we defined,
in this case b, which we defined on line 65.
So I've gotta change branch dot branch count
to b dot branch count.
Do that for both.
You see now that I've done that,
it's perfectly fine and the code compiles.
That verifies that you can use the same attribute name
or type as a parent's static attribute.
And we'll just run this.
And you can see the code works as before.
So that's fine, verifying now that
we can use the same attribute name type
as the parent's static attribute, as I mentioned.
But is this true of static methods?
So let's change the company class's
add employee method to be static.
So we'll come back to the top now, for our company.
So at the moment you can see
we've got add employee defined on line 27.
It's not a static method.
Let's in fact make that static.
You can see straight away that's introduced a compile error.
We'll go down and check that out.
And the error's on the
add employee method of the branch class.
So what you can't do is have a method on a child class
that overrides a parent's static method unless
the child's method is also static.
Now I'm gonna talk a lot more about
overriding methods in a future video.
I'm just gonna undo this last change
so the code compiles and still works.
Right, just to make sure there's no errors.
We're good to go.
All right, so I'm gonna finish the video here now.
Coming up is a quiz, and then after that
I'm gonna see you in a video where
we're gonna start talking about
abstract classes and the role they play in inheritance.
See you in the next video.